Day 20: “Forms are a badly designed part of HTML” / Jens Grochtdreis (#209)
matuzo/HTMHell: hell/adventcalendar/2025/20/index.md

---
title: "Forms are a badly designed part of HTML"
author: "Jens Grochtdreis"
author_bio: Jens works as a frontend developer for <a href="https://www.swr.de">public radio and tv</a> in Germany. He founded the Webkrauts (the German webstandards movement) in 2005 for evangelising webstandards and better coding for a modern web."
date: 2025-12-20
author_links:
  - label: "blog"
    url: "https://css-weblog.de"
    link_label: "My German weblog, mostly about CSS."
  - label: "Bluesky"
    url: "https://bsky.app/profile/jensgro.bsky.social"
    link_label: "jensgro.bsky.social"    
  - label: "Mastodon"
    url: "https://mastodon.social/@jensgro"
    link_label: "@jensgro@mastodon.social"
  - label: "Codepen"
    url: "https://codepen.io/jensgro"
    link_label: "jensgro"
intro: "<p>Forms, huge or compact, are one of the important building blocks of the web. Without forms the web would be a one-way street. With HTML5 we received an optimized set of form elements. HTML5 turned into a Recommendation in 2014. But until now web developers have to struggle with forms.</p>"
image: "advent25_20"
---

> Forms were likely one of the reasons why browser vendors joined forces in the WHATWG in 2004. They felt that HTML standardization was heading into the wrong direction and wanted more practical relevance. While this may be an oversimplification, if true, it highlights the failure of the WHATWG (i.e., the browser vendors) and, subsequently, the W3C. Although the newly standardized form elements and features all point into the right direction, they are incomplete and unfinished. The fact that this is still the case, even more than ten years after HTML5 became a recommendation, is alarming.

Reviewer: Agree 🌶️ – it's a strong opening and I like the spice here (pulls you in), but the first sentence feels like we're being dropped into the middle of "HTML5 failed us".

Maybe even just flipping the sentence around helps with the flow?

> One of the reasons why browser vendors joined forces in the WHATWG in 2004 was likely forms.

Personally I think some (very brief) context at the start would also be good – Why are native forms better? What’s the cost of JS reimplementations? Why is it so hard to get right? etc

... But I also get that this is probably an article for quite a specific audience so I get it if you feel it's too much generic overview!

Author: I guess I cannot stress all the important points in the first paragraph. If you think after reading the whole article that my point to avoid JS where possible wasn't stressed enough, I should add some sentences. But not all just at the beginning.

Author: Well "HTML5 failed us" - partially. That's the point of the article.

> ## New Form Elements

Reviewer: I think before getting into the meat, some signposting would help – I felt a bit lost as a reader as to what's to follow.

Maybe add a sentence before this section summarising the three major problem categories: missing elements, inconsistent behaviour, impossible styling.

Author: I don't understand this comment? Is it again that you want to put everything on one place? Should I mention everything in the first one or two paragraphs that I want to discuss further? Why should I?

Reviewer: > Why should I?

Up to you! In general very briefly saying what journey you're about to bring the reader on is definitely a good thing. It's not about a lack of substance (you make a very strong argument across the post), but a missing invitation to the reader on what's to come. Are we going to now look at why it's alarming, or how it's alarming, or how the new form elements are unfinished, or what is causing browser vendors to fail? Just one brief sentence like "Let's look at the specifics of x and y to understand how/why z." 

That would cover my [other](https://github.com/matuzo/HTMHell/pull/209#discussion_r2528397479) comment as well.

The WHATWG introduced several new form elements and attributes into the HTML specification, e.g. the email input, telephone input, date field, and range slider. Most of these are simply new types of the input element. This approach was clever — a great example of progressive enhancement. If a browser hasn’t implemented a particular input type yet, a plain text field serves as a fallback. Developers can then use JavaScript if needed. However, when the new elements are supported, JavaScript becomes unnecessary.

> Most of the new form elements are essentially shortcuts. They combine regular expressions for validation, an ARIA role, and sometimes trigger a specialized virtual keyboard on mobile phones and tablets. They are similar to web components based on the input element, but are integrated directly into the browser, so no JavaScript is needed for the element to appear. And because they are standardized, the code is consistent across implementations. These are very simple elements.

Reviewer: I was thrown a bit by the transition between these paragraphs – it feels like we go from _clever… progressive… no JS needed..._, and the start of the second is preparing to critique that in some way, but it sort of just restates the point (_simple shortcuts… no JS needed… consistent across implementations_)

Why are we talking about the simplicity or what it enables? Is it to set us up for the lack of combinations of elements?

Maybe a bridging sentence between these two paras, something like

`This progressive-enhancement model works well for simple inputs. But these elements are intentionally very simple – essentially shortcuts for single-value fields. They combine…`

Or

`In practice, these new types behave more like small, built-in conveniences rather than full-fledged components. Most of the new elements are essentially shortcuts...`

Author: There is no essential critique in the second paragraph and it astonishes me that you interprete it in that way. 
My first statement was "kudos for the intelligent design". The second was merely a description that those elements are simple.
I consider both of your text examples. They would be good for this passage.

Reviewer: I think it was just a question of signposting. Sorry, I said that in way too many words... 😝

Simply that as I was reading and reached the second paragraph, my brain wasn't sure whether this was now a supporting example of the first, a contrasting argument to the first, or an elaboration.

Combinations of different form elements have unfortunately not been considered at all. As examples, I would like to mention the [combobox](https://open-ui.org/components/combobox.explainer/) and the [range slider](https://open-ui.org/components/enhanced-range-input.explainer/).

### The Combobox

> The [combobox](https://component.gallery/components/combobox/) is a combination of a select and a search field. Fluent UI provides a [combobox component](https://fluentsite.z22.web.core.windows.net/0.66.2/maximize/dropdown-example-search-multiple-shorthand/false), as does [Ant Design](https://ant.design/~demos/select-demo-multiple). In both cases, only the search field is a form field. The select is simulated by a list in Fluent, while Ant Design uses a div. The selected options are displayed as (fake) buttons using span and svg elements. This has little to do with actual forms.

Reviewer: Visuals of a combobox and range slider would be nice here

Author: You are right.

## Built-in Validation

Standardizing validation in the browser was a smart idea. There are built-in regex rules for validation, which can be manually overridden. Validation is controlled via attributes and a standardized JavaScript API, which is great. In practice, however, you quickly run into details that aren’t flexibly solved. This leads to custom solutions using JavaScript.

There is no simple, built-in way to collect all error messages and display them at the top or bottom of the form without JavaScript. Nor is there a way to communicate the total number of errors to the user. Error messages at the element itself are shown via a popup, which cannot be styled or repositioned. For any improvements in usability and clearer communication, you'll need JavaScript. While this is done through a unified API, it still isn’t possible with plain HTML.

> It would be desirable to configure different error handling methods using HTML. Instead of relying on JavaScript, we should be able to solve everything with attributes. The less JavaScript is needed, the faster the page will be.

Reviewer: Just a suggestion to soften the tone a bit, and make it feel less academic

```suggestion
HTML needs better built-in options for handling errors. We should be able to control this with attributes, not JavaScript. The less JavaScript is needed, the faster the page will be.
```

## Inconsistent browser support

> The standard doesn't give form elements consistent capabilities and appearance. I don't know whether browser vendors weren't willing to agree on this or if they didn't see any necessity. Consistency in usability, feature set and apperance would be helpful for both users and developers/designers. It seems obvious and easy to integrate the color pickers of the respective operating systems for the color picker control. However, these cannot be styled and offer different features. Android and iOS replace the HTML date picker with their own widget. That’s great. But on desktop, the appearance is completely different and cannot be influenced. While the usability may be familiar to users, for web developers and their clients, this inconsistency is a nightmare. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The standard doesn't give form elements consistent capabilities or appearance. I don't know whether browser vendors weren't willing to align on this or simply didn't see the need. Either way, consistent usability, features, and appearance would help both users and developers. For example, browsers hook into the operating system's built-in color picker, which seems sensible – but these pickers can’t be styled and differ in functionality. Android and iOS replace the HTML date picker with their own native widget, which is great on mobile. But on desktop, each browser presents a completely different UI, and none of it is customizable. The result may feel familiar to users, but for developers and their clients, the inconsistency is a nightmare.
```

Author: Great re-writing. Thank you.

> The number input offers increment/decrement arrows in one browser but not in another. The usefulness of these arrows is debatable. The date field is only read aloud [by the iOS native screen reader](https://tetralogical.github.io/screen-reader-HTML-support/lookup/lookup.html#input-date)) when a date is already present; it is not announced as a date field. The email input is announced [only by Voice Over on MacOS](https://tetralogical.github.io/screen-reader-HTML-support/lookup/lookup.html#input-email) as an email-field. Others don't specify the semantic, JAWS seems to ignore it. If browser vendors are leading the standardization of these features, I expect better coordination and consistent implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The number input offers increment/decrement arrows in one browser but not in another. The usefulness of these arrows is debatable. The date field is only read aloud [by the iOS native screen reader](https://tetralogical.github.io/screen-reader-HTML-support/lookup/lookup.html#input-date)) when a date is already present; it is not announced as a date field. The email input is announced as an email field [only by Voice Over on MacOS](https://tetralogical.github.io/screen-reader-HTML-support/lookup/lookup.html#input-email). Other screen readers don't specify the semantics, and JAWS seems to ignore it entirely. If browser vendors are leading the standardization of these features, I expect better coordination and consistent implementation.
```

> Semantic information should be transported to screenreaders. Otherwise the new semantic field is only half baked. It is more a text input with an integrated regex, triggering an onscreen keyboard. Both last features could have been achieved otherwise without having an explicit email-field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Semantic information needs to be exposed to screen readers. Without that, the new input type feels only half-baked – basically just a text input with built-in validation and a tailored onscreen keyboard. And both of those could have been achieved without introducing a dedicated email input.
```

## Partially Miserable Styling Options

> Styling form elements is a major challenge that often ends in failure. Frequently, the form element itself is hidden and instead the label element is styled. Or the form element is hidden and replaced via JavaScript with a construction of DIVs and/or lists, which can then be freely styled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Styling form elements is a major challenge that often ends in failure. Developers frequently hide the native control and style the label instead – or hide the control entirely and replace it with a JavaScript-driven construction of divs or lists that can be freely styled.
```

Reviewer: Perhaps mention here that some controls aren't only replaced for aesthetics, but because they want to expose better semantics or have more consistent event sequencing. 

I know your point here is about styling, but maybe a side note would add a bit of depth – there are many reasons why developers opt to not use a native control, and some of them are more "noble" than just appearances. We're all fighting the good fight, so to say 😝

Author: I don't get any idea of which kind of controls you would refer to. One example would be Select2. A JS-controlled replacement of a select field. There is no better semantic combined with it. Just better styling.
I cannot recall any self-built form element which is really good. And to be fair: it is complicated. Especially if you want to serve every need and not only your special ones.

Reviewer: Yeah, for select specifically, afaik the order of `mousedown`/`focus`/`click` and such is different across browsers for select? And `input`/`change` events fire under different circumstances? If you need to hook into those events reliably for whatever reason, you'd need to roll your own for full control. 

On a re-read though, I think ignore my comment – it would distract from the point.

It’s a start. But we need more standardization. All controls that are currently hidden in the browser’s Shadow DOM need standardized structures and names so that we can select and style them consistently.

At CSSDay 2025 in Amsterdam, Tim Nguyen presented the Working Draft "[CSS Form Control Styling Level 1](https://www.w3.org/TR/2025/WD-css-forms-1-20250325/)". Standardization has only just begun. I hope this Working Draft matures quickly and finds its way into browsers. We need to quickly find a way to reliably style form elements.

If forms do not gain more styling options in the near future, we will not be able to move away from [JavaScript-based date pickers](https://open-ui.org/components/datepicker.research/) anytime soon. But what’s the point of having the right element if we have to replace it with a custom construct at the first opportunity because we otherwise have no sufficient styling options? Standards are supposed to help us and make the web better.

> [Interop 2025](https://wpt.fyi/interop-2025) had no aspects for designing better forms. Maybe some aspects will make it to Interop 2026. [The selection process](https://github.com/web-platform-tests/interop/blob/main/2026/selection-process.md) should be finished when this article is published.

Reviewer: There's a lot of repetition in this section re the points of "styling is miserable", "we need more standardization", "elements replaced with custom constructs". I would remove the repeated points as the opening is quite strong already, and focus on the supporting examples.

```suggestion
Fundamentally, styling form elements is miserable. This is why [58% of participants](https://2024.stateofhtml.com/en-US/features/forms/) in the "State of HTML 2024" survey identified styling as by far the biggest pain point with forms.

Browser vendors are currently more active in CSS than in HTML, so there’s a faint glimmer of hope on the horizon. Chromium has introduced the customizable select, based on an [Open UI proposal](https://open-ui.org/components/customizableselect/), and Brecht deRuyte has dedicated a [series of articles](https://utilitybend.com/blog/the-customizable-select-part-one-history-trickery-and-styling-the-select-with-css) on the new, fantastic possibilities.

It’s a start, but the broader problem remains: all controls hidden inside the browser’s shadow DOM need consistent, standardized structure so they can be styled reliably. At CSSDay 2025, Tim Nguyen presented the Working Draft “[CSS Form Control Styling Level 1](https://www.w3.org/TR/2025/WD-css-forms-1-20250325/)” – early work, but promising. I hope it matures quickly and finds its way into browsers.

Without meaningful progress here, we’ll be stuck with [JavaScript-based date pickers](https://open-ui.org/components/datepicker.research/) and other custom controls for the foreseeable future. What’s the point of having a native element if we have to replace it at the first opportunity because we can’t style it?

[Interop 2025](https://wpt.fyi/interop-2025) didn’t include any focus on form controls. Hopefully some proposals make it into Interop 2026 once the [selection process](https://github.com/web-platform-tests/interop/blob/main/2026/selection-process.md) concludes (hopefully by the time this article is published). 
```

## Lack of Further Development

> We are missing important form elements. These have to be simulated using JavaScript. In recent years, standardizers could and should have filled this gap. In my view it is not satisfying to say that we now have all the building blocks at our disposal to combine them into new elements using JavaScript. The Web Components API would serve as the basis. If you take this argument to its logical conclusion, we could reduce HTML to just the span element. We would then create the rest of the elements as web components, enriched with attributes (including ARIA). That can’t seriously be the goal.

Reviewer: I'd suggest rewriting this section to clarify the "span-only web components" analogy and reduce the risk of it being misunderstood (the phrasing could be read as too literal or too sweeping maybe?)

One suggestion, along with some improvements to idiomatic phrasing and slightly stronger contrasting between native elements and custom implementations.

```suggestion
We are still missing important form elements, and developers have to simulate them with JavaScript. Standardizers could have addressed these gaps in recent years, yet the common response is that we already have all the "building blocks" needed – that developers can simply assemble new controls using JavaScript and Web Components.

Taken to its logical extreme, this argument would reduce HTML to a handful of primitive elements. Everything else would be rebuilt as custom components, each with its own attributes, ARIA wiring, and implementation quirks. That can’t seriously be the goal.
```

Author: Your suggestion is good but I will have to rethink it a little.

> In my view, HTML elements are browser-specific web components. They have the great advantage that they do not require JavaScript because they are built directly into the browser. They are also the same for all end users and devices. A non-standardized form element, on the other hand, exists in many variants, on different technical bases, and in varying quality and implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In my view, HTML elements are, in a sense, browser-specific web components, but with some crucial advantages: they do not require JavaScript, and they behave the same for all end users and devices. Non-standard controls, on the other hand, come in dozens of variations, built on different foundations, and with varying quality. Standardization exists precisely so we don’t all have to reinvent them.
```

## Hope Is Rising

The lack of standardization leads to many different approaches to the same problem. What they have in common is that they have little or nothing to do with actual form elements.

Fortunately, practitioners have come together in the "[Open UI](https://open-ui.org/)" community group to advance the standardization of HTML and CSS. They describe several features that are missing as standards in HTML. For the combobox, Open UI has created [a proposal](https://open-ui.org/components/combobox.explainer/). I hope it will be implemented in browsers and standardized soon.

> The same applies to the range slider with more than one value. Open UI also offers a great idea for a long-overdue [extension of the standard](https://open-ui.org/components/enhanced-range-input.explainer/).

Reviewer: Perhaps also mention other Open UI work such as the Switch to extend beyond the examples in the article. More generally, maybe mentioning work around non-form elements as well would be nice to support the wave of innovation argument?

## A New Wave of Innovation Is Needed

This article is a very rough overview of the state of forms. My main demands for innovation are:

1. We need more complex form fields as standard elements, such as a combobox.
2. We need a range input with multiple handles.
3. We need much better styling opportunities for every form element. The new stylable select shows the right direction. 
4. Form validation should be controlled by HTML-attributes instead of JavaScript. It's styling should be easy and consistent between browsers.
5. Screenreaders should communicate form semantic without flaws.

> The innovation of forms should be part of a much larger innovation. WHATWG and W3C demonstrated at the beginning of the millennium that they are capable of such an innovation. After two decades, it is time to revive this spirit and take HTML to a new level. Websites aren't always the strict documents as they were invented for. The usual starting page of a news site has little in common with the  original idea of HTML. Those pages  usually consist mainly of headlines accompanied by a huge amount of images and some short text bites. The startpage of the New York Times presents teasers without headlines. This shows that there is no safe common ground for developers creating such a page type. 

Reviewer: I think it would be nice to include some brief positive examples somewhere here at the end. It would make the argument feel more balanced and credible, and maybe smooth the arc from a call (_demand_) for innovation and nostalgia to "there's no safe common ground". 

Maybe a short nod to recent platform improvements like `<dialog>`, `<details>`, the popover API...? It would highlight that HTML _can_ evolve when effort is put into it, and would make the call for renewed innovation feel more hopeful. 

One suggestion (also removing some repetition of "Innovation"):

```suggestion
The innovation of forms should be part of a much larger initiative. WHATWG and W3C demonstrated at the beginning of the millennium that this is possible. After two decades, it is time to revive this spirit and take HTML to a new level. We’ve seen hints of this recently – elements like `<dialog>`, the popover API, and renewed work on customizable form controls show that the platform can still evolve in meaningful ways. But these feel like isolated wins rather than part of a broader push.

Modern websites no longer fit the document-centric model HTML was created for. A typical news homepage mixes headlines, images, teasers, and interactive elements in ways the original spec never anticipated. The New York Times even present teasers without headlines at all. This diversity shows how little shared foundation there is for developers today – and why HTML needs a broader, more coordinated evolution beyond isolated improvements.
```

Author: Good idea.

---
title: "Forms are a badly designed part of HTML"
author: "Jens Grochtdreis"
author_bio: Jens works as a frontend developer for <a href="https://www.swr.de">public radio and tv</a> in Germany. He founded the Webkrauts (the German webstandards movement) in 2005 for evangelising webstandards and better coding for a modern web."
date: 2025-12-20
author_links:
  - label: "blog"
    url: "https://css-weblog.de"
    link_label: "My German weblog, mostly about CSS."
  - label: "Bluesky"
    url: "https://bsky.app/profile/jensgro.bsky.social"
    link_label: "jensgro.bsky.social"    
  - label: "Mastodon"
    url: "https://mastodon.social/@jensgro"
    link_label: "@jensgro@mastodon.social"
  - label: "Codepen"
    url: "https://codepen.io/jensgro"
    link_label: "jensgro"
intro: "<p>Forms, huge or compact, are one of the important building blocks of the web. Without forms the web would be a one-way street. With HTML5 we received an optimized set of form elements. HTML5 turned into a Recommendation in 2014. But until now web developers have to struggle with forms.</p>"
image: "advent25_20"
---

> Forms were likely one of the reasons why browser vendors joined forces in the WHATWG in 2004. They felt that HTML standardization was heading into the wrong direction and wanted more practical relevance. While this may be an oversimplification, if true, it highlights the failure of the WHATWG (i.e., the browser vendors) and, subsequently, the W3C. Although the newly standardized form elements and features all point into the right direction, they are incomplete and unfinished. The fact that this is still the case, even more than ten years after HTML5 became a recommendation, is alarming. I will cencentrate in this article on missing elements, inconsistent behaviour and the problems with styling.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Forms were likely one of the reasons why browser vendors joined forces in the WHATWG in 2004. They felt that HTML standardization was heading into the wrong direction and wanted more practical relevance. While this may be an oversimplification, if true, it highlights the failure of the WHATWG (i.e., the browser vendors) and, subsequently, the W3C. Although the newly standardized form elements and features all point into the right direction, they are incomplete and unfinished. The fact that this is still the case, even more than ten years after HTML5 became a recommendation, is alarming. I will concentrate in this article on forms and especially on missing elements, inconsistent behaviour and the problems with styling.
```

Reviewer 2: > Forms were likely one of the reasons why browser vendors joined forces in the WHATWG in 2004.

_Likely_ makes it sound like a claim and not a fact. Can we link here to the original mailing list or one of the first official documents describing there mission.

Author: I followed the discussion and publications around HTML5 when it unfolded. I gave many talks that were rootet in this argumentation. IIRC the first name wan't HTML5 but something with forms.

I don't want write a sociological article where I have to deliver literature footnotes. 
Either you buy my opinionated article or you don't. It's up to you.

Most comments were fruitful but there is an end to that.

Reviewer 2: If I didn't know you, I probably wouldn't. My comments were very critical, more critical than in most submissions, but the core of your article is a criticism of parts of the HTML standard. My goal was to help you back up your claims. 
The article is still good, but I just would've loved your arguments to be solid. Anyway, if you're happy, I'm happy. Merged.

## New Form Elements

The WHATWG introduced several new form elements and attributes into the HTML specification, e.g. the email input, telephone input, date field, and range slider. Most of these are simply new types of the input element. This approach was clever — a great example of progressive enhancement. If a browser hasn’t implemented a particular input type yet, a plain text field serves as a fallback. Developers can then use JavaScript if needed. However, when the new elements are supported, JavaScript becomes unnecessary.

> This progressive-enhancement model works well for simple inputs. So these new elements are intentionally very simple – essentially shortcuts for single-value fields. They combine regular expressions for validation, an ARIA role, and sometimes trigger a specialized virtual keyboard on mobile phones and tablets. They are similar to web components based on the input element, but are integrated directly into the browser, so no JavaScript is needed for the element to appear. And because they are standardized, the code is consistent across implementations. These are very simple elements.

Reviewer 2: > These are very simple elements.

You already said they're simple at the beginning of this paragraph. Is there a reason you're repeating it? If yes, the reason of your emphasis on the simplicity isn't clear.

Author: very simple deleted :-)

<figure>
  <img src="combobox-github.png" alt="A button has opend ea layer which is in essence a combination of an input-field with search-icon and a select element." loading="lazy" width="306" height="372">
  <figcaption>The combobox (called select-panel) from the <a href="https://primer.style/product/components/select-panel/">Github-design system</a>.</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure>
  <img src="combobox-ant-design.png" alt="Combobox showing a select with two marked entries. These entries are as well represented as clickable tags inside a formfield where you could type for new tags/entries." loading="lazy" width="407" height="385">
  <figcaption>The combobox from the design-system of <a href="https://ant.design/~demos/select-demo-multiple">ant-design</a>.</figcaption>
</figure>

### The Enhanced Range Element

> The [range element](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Reference/Elements/input/range) can unfortunately only represent a single value. The frequently needed [range slider](https://open-ui.org/components/slider.research/) for two or more values (e.g. for shopping portals) does not exist. You'll have to build it yourself. The well-known [noUiSlider](https://refreshless.com/nouislider/) simulates the slider for one or more values consistently with a div. At least ARIA attributes are used throughout. The same goes with the version by [Quasar](https://quasar.dev/vue-components/range/). No form elements were harmed. It’s a pity that this obvious use case was not standardized.

Reviewer 2: > frequently needed

Is there a GitHub issue or similar that proves they're frequently needed?

Author: no but you can surf around different e-commerce sites and pages with differentiatet searches.

Why would anybody open up a GitHub issue for that? Where? Who knows that there is this possibility?

Reviewer 2: There are 2.1k open and 3.4k closed issues in the WHATWG GitHub repository.

https://github.com/whatwg/html/issues/10806

## Built-in Validation

Standardizing validation in the browser was a smart idea. There are built-in regex rules for validation, which can be manually overridden. Validation is controlled via attributes and a standardized JavaScript API, which is great. In practice, however, you quickly run into details that aren’t flexibly solved. This leads to custom solutions using JavaScript.

There is no simple, built-in way to collect all error messages and display them at the top or bottom of the form without JavaScript. Nor is there a way to communicate the total number of errors to the user. Error messages at the element itself are shown via a popup, which cannot be styled or repositioned. For any improvements in usability and clearer communication, you'll need JavaScript. While this is done through a unified API, it still isn’t possible with plain HTML.

> HTML needs better built-in options for handling errors. We should be able to control this with attributes, not JavaScript. The less JavaScript is needed, the faster the page will be.

Reviewer 2: Recently changes to address these issues in WCAG have been made to the Understanding document of SC 3.3.1. Mentioning that and linking to the issue will help validate your statement.

https://github.com/w3c/wcag/pull/4431
https://github.com/w3c/wcag/pull/4431/files

Author: nice links but I don't think that I need them.

## Inconsistent browser support

> The standard doesn't give form elements consistent capabilities or appearance. I don't know whether browser vendors weren't willing to align on this or simply didn't see the need. Either way, consistent usability, features, and appearance would help both users and developers. For example, browsers hook into the operating system's built-in color picker, which seems sensible – but these pickers can’t be styled and differ in functionality. Android and iOS replace the HTML date picker with their own native widget, which is great on mobile. But on desktop, each browser presents a completely different UI, and none of it is customizable. The result may feel familiar to users, but for developers and their clients, the inconsistency is a nightmare. 

Reviewer 2: > The standard doesn't give form elements consistent

What do you mean by _give_? Give as in _provide clear instructions_?

Reviewer 2: > The result may feel familiar to users, but for developers and their clients, the inconsistency is a nightmare.

Okay, but who cares if users are happy. UX is more important than DX and not the other way around.

Author: I give it another try with a new paragraph.

> The number input offers increment/decrement arrows in one browser but not in another. The usefulness of these arrows is debatable. The date field is only read aloud [by the iOS native screen reader](https://tetralogical.github.io/screen-reader-HTML-support/lookup/lookup.html#input-date)) when a date is already present; it is not announced as a date field. The email input is announced as an email field [only by Voice Over on MacOS](https://tetralogical.github.io/screen-reader-HTML-support/lookup/lookup.html#input-email). Other screen readers don't specify the semantics, and JAWS seems to ignore it entirely. If browser vendors are leading the standardization of these features, I expect better coordination and consistent implementation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The number input offers increment/decrement arrows in one browser but not in another. The usefulness of these arrows is debatable. The date field is only read aloud [by the native screen reader on iOS](https://tetralogical.github.io/screen-reader-HTML-support/lookup/lookup.html#input-date) when a date is already present; it is not announced as a date field. The email input is announced as an email field [only by Voice Over on MacOS](https://tetralogical.github.io/screen-reader-HTML-support/lookup/lookup.html#input-email). Other screen readers don't specify the semantics, and JAWS seems to ignore it entirely. If browser vendors are leading the standardization of these features, I expect better coordination and consistent implementation.
```

Reviewer 2: > and JAWS seems to ignore it entirely

That sounds like email input fields don't work with JAWS.

Reviewer 2: > Other screen readers don't specify the semantic

They don't _specify_ anything. The only _announce_ the information. All screen readers announce that it's a textbox, which is the semantic information they get from all browsers.

> I expect better coordination and consistent implementation.

In this case, it's not a matter of implementation. They are implemented consistently. The role of input fields is textbox and here's the definition of the [ARIA to Accessibility API mappings](https://www.w3.org/TR/core-aam-1.2/#role-map-textbox). Assistive technologies either only use the information provided by the browsers via the accessibility API or the markup directly via the DOM, to convey semantic and interaction information to the user. See [User Agent support](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-1.2/#ua-support). That's why announcement can differ. AT use the accessibility tree and the DOM.

The way I see it, what you are talking about is more a matter of standardisation and not implementation.

> Semantic information needs to be exposed to screen readers. Without that, the new input type feels only half-baked – basically just a text input with built-in validation and a tailored onscreen keyboard. And both of those could have been achieved without introducing a dedicated email input.

Reviewer 2: > Semantic information needs to be exposed to screen readers.

It is (see previous comment). Unfortunately, you didn't address my comment from the first review here, so I will repeat it: Input fields come with labels. A combination of label + ARIA role provides the information users need.

```html
<p>
  <label for="data">Date</label>
  <input type="date" id="date">
</p>

<p>
  <label for="email">E-Mail</label>
  <input type="email" id="email">
</p>
```

JAWS and NVDA announce "Date, edit" and "E-Mail, edit, blank". Depending on the SR and Browser you'll get extra info like "month spin button 0" or "use arrow keys to select a date", but that depends on the software.

If your point is that all SR should announce it like VO "Email, email, edit" than please explain why this redundancy is necessary and provide an example where the label doesn't provide enough information.

Author: I don't think that it is correct for screenreaders to ignore semantic. We use an e-mail field , the SR should announce an e.mail field. Same with strong or em which aren't transported.

I stay to my argument. And I didn't take yours because I'll stay with mine in my article.

Reviewer 2: That's fine, you don't have to. All I was trying to tell you is that the way you wrote it, it doesn't sound like you thought your argument through.

It’s a start, but the broader problem remains: all controls hidden inside the browser’s shadow DOM need consistent, standardized structure so they can be styled reliably. At CSSDay 2025, Tim Nguyen presented the Working Draft “[CSS Form Control Styling Level 1](https://www.w3.org/TR/2025/WD-css-forms-1-20250325/)” – early work, but promising. I hope it matures quickly and finds its way into browsers.

Without meaningful progress here, we’ll be stuck with [JavaScript-based date pickers](https://open-ui.org/components/datepicker.research/) and other custom controls for the foreseeable future. What’s the point of having a native element if we have to replace it at the first opportunity because we can’t style it?

[Interop 2025](https://wpt.fyi/interop-2025) didn’t include any focus on form controls. Hopefully some proposals make it into Interop 2026 once the [selection process](https://github.com/web-platform-tests/interop/blob/main/2026/selection-process.md) concludes (hopefully by the time this article is published). 

## Lack of Further Development

> We are still missing important form elements, and developers have to simulate them with JavaScript. Standardizers could have addressed these gaps in recent years, yet the common response is that we already have all the "building blocks" needed – that developers can simply assemble new controls using JavaScript and Web Components.

Reviewer 2: > yet the common response is that we already have all the "building blocks"

please provide a source for that, e.g. a GitHub issue

In my view, HTML elements are, in a sense, browser-specific web components, but with some crucial advantages: they do not require JavaScript, and they behave the same for all end users and devices. Non-standard controls, on the other hand, come in dozens of variations, built on different foundations, and with varying quality. Standardization exists precisely so we don’t all have to reinvent them.

## Hope Is Rising

The lack of standardization leads to many different approaches to the same problem. What they have in common is that they have little or nothing to do with actual form elements.

Fortunately, practitioners have come together in the "[Open UI](https://open-ui.org/)" community group to advance the standardization of HTML and CSS. They describe several features that are missing as standards in HTML. For the combobox, Open UI has created [a proposal](https://open-ui.org/components/combobox.explainer/). I hope it will be implemented in browsers and standardized soon.

The same applies to the range slider with more than one value. Open UI also offers a great idea for a long-overdue [extension of the standard](https://open-ui.org/components/enhanced-range-input.explainer/).

> ## A New Wave of Innovation Is Needed

Reviewer 2: I like your conclusion, great job!

This article is a very rough overview of the state of forms. My main demands for innovation are:

1. We need more complex form fields as standard elements, such as a combobox.
2. We need a range input with multiple handles.
3. We need much better styling opportunities for every form element. The new stylable select shows the right direction. 
4. Form validation should be controlled by HTML-attributes instead of JavaScript. It's styling should be easy and consistent between browsers.

> 5. Screenreaders should communicate form semantic without flaws.

Reviewer 2: This addresses the screen reader vendors and not WHATWG. The are still some unanswered questions about what your main concern is (see previous comments), but it should be clear here who needs to fix is. Do we need more ARIA roles, should the documentation be better, or do screen reader vendors need to do a better job?

Author: yes, it is a new aspect and goes further than only the standards body. This is the same with the final part of need innovation. It takes a step further and uses the discussed topic to bring in more aspects. I would like to leave it like that.

It would be desirable to configure different error handling methods using HTML. Instead of relying on JavaScript, we should be able to solve everything with attributes. The less JavaScript is needed, the faster the page will be.

## Inconsistent browser support

Browser vendors apparently couldn’t agree on giving form elements consistent capabilities and appearance. It’s obvious to integrate the color pickers of the respective operating systems for the color picker. However, these cannot be styled and offer different features. While the usability may be familiar to users, for web developers and their clients, this inconsistency is a nightmare. Android and iOS replace the HTML date picker with their own widget. That’s great. But on desktop, the appearance is completely different and cannot be influenced.

> The number input offers increment/decrement arrows in one browser but not in another. The usefulness of these arrows is debatable. The date field is only read aloud [by the iOS native screen reader](https://tetralogical.github.io/screen-reader-HTML-support/lookup/lookup.html#input-date)) when a date is already present; it is not announced as a date field. The email input is announced [by no screen reader](https://tetralogical.github.io/screen-reader-HTML-support/lookup/lookup.html#input-email). If browser vendors are leading the standardization of these features, I expect better coordination and consistent implementation.

Reviewer 2: > The email input is announced [by no screen reader](https://tetralogical.github.io/screen-reader-HTML-support/lookup/lookup.html#input-email).

VO on macOS announces "edit text, email field"

> If browser vendors are leading the standardization of these features, I expect better coordination and consistent implementation.

So, you're suggesting there should be a role="emailbox"? I'm asking because semantically an email input field is just a textbox. You can use the label element to describe the purpose. What I'm getting from your statements is that browser should expose the purpose of input fields as semantic information so that screen readers can use it without having to query the DOM?

Author: yes. Semantic information should be transported to screenreaders. Otherwise the new semantic field is only half baked. It is more a text input with an integrated regex, triggering an onscreen keyboard. Both last features could have been achieved otherwise without having an email-field.

Author: I really don't know where I got my info about no screenreader announcing an email-field from. Please delete it in the end.

It’s a start. But we need more standardization. All controls that are currently hidden in the browser’s Shadow DOM need standardized structures and names so that we can select and style them consistently.

At CSSDay 2025 in Amsterdam, Tim Nguyen presented the Working Draft "[CSS Form Control Styling Level 1](https://www.w3.org/TR/2025/WD-css-forms-1-20250325/)". Standardization has only just begun. I hope this Working Draft matures quickly and finds its way into browsers. We need to quickly find a way to reliably style form elements.

If forms do not gain more styling options in the near future, we will not be able to move away from [JavaScript-based date pickers](https://open-ui.org/components/datepicker.research/) anytime soon. But what’s the point of having the right element if we have to replace it with a custom construct at the first opportunity because we otherwise have no sufficient styling options? Standards are supposed to help us and make the web better.

> ## Lack of Further Development

Author: I haven't had a glimpse. Sorry. But wouldn't we know and be totally happy? The only improvement is now the stylable select.

## Hope Is Rising

The lack of standardization leads to many different approaches to the same problem. What they have in common is that they have little or nothing to do with actual form elements.

Fortunately, practitioners have come together in the "[Open UI](https://open-ui.org/)" community group to advance the standardization of HTML and CSS. They describe several features that are missing as standards in HTML. For the combobox, Open UI has created [a proposal](https://open-ui.org/components/combobox.explainer/). I hope it will be implemented in browsers and standardized soon.

The same applies to the range slider with more than one value. Open UI also offers a great idea for a long-overdue [extension of the standard](https://open-ui.org/components/enhanced-range-input.explainer/).

## A New Wave of Innovation Is Needed

> WHATWG and W3C demonstrated at the beginning of the millennium that they are capable of innovation. After two decades, it is time to revive this spirit and take HTML to a new level. Modern websites have very little to do with the original idea of HTML. The W3C should respond with new elements and paradigms. The document analogy should stand alongside interactive applications as equals. The more that is standardized in this regard, the better it is for the industry. And end users will also benefit from consistently high-quality websites.

Reviewer 2: > Modern websites have very little to do with the original idea of HTML.

That's a bold statement. Is this really true for most websites?

Reviewer 2: Many people, also browser people, will read these blog posts. I see an opportunity here to spark a discussion. What I'd love to see at the end of the post is a bullet list of the major criticisms, especially those you haven't mentioned explicitly. This will allow people to quickly scan the core content, visualize how problematic the situation is and help emphasise your claims.

1. No native combobox field.
2. Range input only supports one thumb.
3. Styling of native select limited
4. …

Author: I rewrote this part and made much less bold statements.
